1_on_cultivated_aversion_and_productivity.md, before:

## Dhamma Letters #1: On Cultivated Aversion and Productivity

I thought I'd pull this into email since we'll never find it in imessage ever again. And thanks for stimulating these conversations, it's a great way to think about things piece by piece, part by part ;)

Quick disclaimer: This is my current understanding of things. My understanding will likely deepen as I keep practicing and making sense of my experiences, but I may be completely wrong :). Also, the verb "feel" will be used often. This is because whenever I think about something now, it's usually because I have a feeling first (or a lack of feeling or reaction) and then use my mind to explain to myself why this is. As you know I like to think so this is actually a very joyful experience for me :). It _feels_ great ;)

>Our conversations have really focused my reticular activation system to find instances of craving & aversion. I don’t remember exactly if I was focused on this or not after the retreat. I just remember a sense of being at peace that faded over time. However, I’m now noticing instances of, say, aversion that are actually helpful, *even though* they cause suffering in the short term. I do remember explicitly thinking I’m gonna discard the Buddhist philosophy in some cases (eg girls). But for the most part I think I just stopped thinking about craving and aversion (and also stopped meditating regularly). It’ll be interesting to talk about this for episode two of the Dhamma Brothers podcast 😅

>Example: I’ve deliberately cultivated a sense of aversion to badly done work. The scope of this keeps getting broader. It started from bad work on Dr. Bill and now I’ve expanded it such that everything from poorly made chopsticks to shitty urban planning piss me off.

>There are other cases where I specifically decided to maintain an aversion to something I think is bad. I think the suffering it causes actually helps guide my actions (mostly productively).

So one thing I have briefly talked about in our initial video call right after the retreat, was the feeling of having a purified mind. This was yet another area where I truly felt like Goenka used the perfect language (meaning it perfectly matches my own experience). It really did feel like a surgical operation on my own mind, e.g. the aspect of pain which is often associated with surgery, but especially -- and maybe even more -- the aspect of repairing something or removing something. In my own personal experience, I removed the aversion against very intense sensations of pain, which dissolved the suffering associated with the pain, which really did feel like my mind was purified after.[^1]

The first thing I did when I came back to my apartment, was to take care of my plant, which had gathered a lot of dust on its leaves because I hadn't showered it in ~2 years. I also wanted to clean my apartment and make it more harmonious, to match my inner feeling. I don't know if you've seen the movie limitless, but in it there is a scene, where the guy comes back high on a new drug, and just starts cleaning up his apartment. It was similar to that. I had this feeling of harmony inside me, and it felt natural for my sorroundings to match it (though there was no association with negative side effects as in the movie ;)

In somewhat the same way, I approach work now. There are likely many character traits that equanimity boosts, but now that I think about it, one that stands out is conscientiousness. Just because I don't feel aversion towards bad work, doesn't mean I don't care about it.[^2] And it certainly doesn't mean I ignore it (though I'm limited to my understanding of bad work). Kind of the opposite is true for me. I feel energized to do my work well and see that I support others if they're struggling. I have no mental baggage of aversions towards doing something wrong, doing something I know will be monotonous or tiresome, or challenging, failing, dealing with "difficult" people, etc. There is no stress associated with missing a deadline because I can accept and be equanimous with any repercussions like losing a client, not getting paid, etc. In a way, not having these aversions leaves my energy for only the things I want to direct it at. There's no draining of energy because of aversion either for the task at hand or aversion towards a future situation. The motivation doesn't come from fixing something that is bad and focusing on the outcome, but it's rather the inner feeling of contientiousness that serves as a constant well of motivation.

At the current time of writing, I'm still discovering things every day and deepening my understanding of my experience. There are many many topics I haven't even thought about and thus I find that if I'm doing a task that doesn't require my full attention, my mind starts to go back to the past or wander into the future and think about situations I've been in, or imagining how I would react in certain situations now. I wouldn't say I'm very present in the moment :). However, this makes sense on a rational level because again, I've learned how to unroot aversions and cravings and it's natural for _my_ mind to assimilate my previous experiences with my new understanding of them. As the months go by, I would expect to assimilate more and more and to slowly be more and more in the moment. For tasks like programming or problem solving, that are mentally very engaging, I'm fully in the moment.

For now this means I'm somewhat easily distracted. Right now actually, I thought I'd be working on a client project but I've decided to assimilate some of my experiences in writing this letter. So maybe I'm less productive at the moment than I would be if I had aversions towards something I think is bad, but any time I do work now, I really am giving it all my attention and energy, and as the months will go by, I think I will be more in the present moment. I'm looking forward to find out how my understanding of productivity deepens then :)

[1]: Personally, I also noticed, that it extended towards other feelings of aversion, such as disgust, hunger, tiredness, annoyance, fear, impatience, stress. To be precise actually, only hunger and tiredness I actually feel (without suffering), the other ones I'm not feeling at all at the moment, though I do notice inefficiencies (-> annoyance, impatience) or dangerous situations (-> fear). Disgust I can't think of any reason right now why I used to feel disgust before (at least in the animal kingdom, everything has evolved to serve it's own survival). But this is a different topic I want to tackle and think about individually :)

[2]: On a side note, the German term for being equanimous is "gleichmütig" and for not caring it's "gleichgültig". There's a thin but deep line between the two of them (and in German not only in concept but also in writing).

Commit message:

Add glossary to first letter

1_on_cultivated_aversion_and_productivity.md, after:


**Glossary:**

_Equanimity:_ Having a calm and balanced mind. Not reacting with craving or aversion towards pleasant or unpleasant situations or bodily feelings.

_Goenka:_ S.N. Goenka, during the 10 days, audio and video recordings of him are used to explain and teach the technique.

_Suffering:_ Any time you can't accept and are in reaction to the current situation you're in, you're suffering. E.g. Someone hits you -> You react with anger to the pain you feel; You have a job interview coming up -> You react with fear or anxiety in anticipation of the interview; Someone keeps interrupting you -> You react with annoyance, impatience, or sometimes even anger; You're running late to meet a new acquaintance -> You react with stress, dissapointment in yourself and anxiety towards judgement from your new acquaintance; A mostquito stings you -> You react to the itchy feeling with scratching because you can't just accept it; Your stomach tells you he really really needs to eat but you can't get at food at the moment -> You become hangry. I could go on forever, people are suffering in a million different ways.

## Dhamma Letters #1: On Cultivated Aversion and Productivity

I thought I'd pull this into email since we'll never find it in imessage ever again. And thanks for stimulating these conversations, it's a great way to think about things piece by piece, part by part ;)

Quick disclaimer: This is my current understanding of things. My understanding will likely deepen as I keep practicing and making sense of my experiences, but I may be completely wrong :). Also, the verb "feel" will be used often. This is because whenever I think about something now, it's usually because I have a feeling first (or a lack of feeling or reaction) and then use my mind to explain to myself why this is. As you know I like to think so this is actually a very joyful experience for me :). It _feels_ great ;)

>Our conversations have really focused my reticular activation system to find instances of craving & aversion. I don’t remember exactly if I was focused on this or not after the retreat. I just remember a sense of being at peace that faded over time. However, I’m now noticing instances of, say, aversion that are actually helpful, *even though* they cause suffering in the short term. I do remember explicitly thinking I’m gonna discard the Buddhist philosophy in some cases (eg girls). But for the most part I think I just stopped thinking about craving and aversion (and also stopped meditating regularly). It’ll be interesting to talk about this for episode two of the Dhamma Brothers podcast 😅

>Example: I’ve deliberately cultivated a sense of aversion to badly done work. The scope of this keeps getting broader. It started from bad work on Dr. Bill and now I’ve expanded it such that everything from poorly made chopsticks to shitty urban planning piss me off.

>There are other cases where I specifically decided to maintain an aversion to something I think is bad. I think the suffering it causes actually helps guide my actions (mostly productively).

So one thing I have briefly talked about in our initial video call right after the retreat, was the feeling of having a purified mind. This was yet another area where I truly felt like Goenka used the perfect language (meaning it perfectly matches my own experience). It really did feel like a surgical operation on my own mind, e.g. the aspect of pain which is often associated with surgery, but especially -- and maybe even more -- the aspect of repairing something or removing something. In my own personal experience, I removed the aversion against very intense sensations of pain, which dissolved the suffering associated with the pain, which really did feel like my mind was purified after.[^1]

The first thing I did when I came back to my apartment, was to take care of my plant, which had gathered a lot of dust on its leaves because I hadn't showered it in ~2 years. I also wanted to clean my apartment and make it more harmonious, to match my inner feeling. I don't know if you've seen the movie limitless, but in it there is a scene, where the guy comes back high on a new drug, and just starts cleaning up his apartment. It was similar to that. I had this feeling of harmony inside me, and it felt natural for my sorroundings to match it (though there was no association with negative side effects as in the movie ;)

In somewhat the same way, I approach work now. There are likely many character traits that equanimity boosts, but now that I think about it, one that stands out is conscientiousness. Just because I don't feel aversion towards bad work, doesn't mean I don't care about it.[^2] And it certainly doesn't mean I ignore it (though I'm limited to my understanding of bad work). Kind of the opposite is true for me. I feel energized to do my work well and see that I support others if they're struggling. I have no mental baggage of aversions towards doing something wrong, doing something I know will be monotonous or tiresome, or challenging, failing, dealing with "difficult" people, etc. There is no stress associated with missing a deadline because I can accept and be equanimous with any repercussions like losing a client, not getting paid, etc. In a way, not having these aversions leaves my energy for only the things I want to direct it at. There's no draining of energy because of aversion either for the task at hand or aversion towards a future situation. The motivation doesn't come from fixing something that is bad and focusing on the outcome, but it's rather the inner feeling of contientiousness that serves as a constant well of motivation.

At the current time of writing, I'm still discovering things every day and deepening my understanding of my experience. There are many many topics I haven't even thought about and thus I find that if I'm doing a task that doesn't require my full attention, my mind starts to go back to the past or wander into the future and think about situations I've been in, or imagining how I would react in certain situations now. I wouldn't say I'm very present in the moment :). However, this makes sense on a rational level because again, I've learned how to unroot aversions and cravings and it's natural for _my_ mind to assimilate my previous experiences with my new understanding of them. As the months go by, I would expect to assimilate more and more and to slowly be more and more in the moment. For tasks like programming or problem solving, that are mentally very engaging, I'm fully in the moment.

For now this means I'm somewhat easily distracted. Right now actually, I thought I'd be working on a client project but I've decided to assimilate some of my experiences in writing this letter. So maybe I'm less productive at the moment than I would be if I had aversions towards something I think is bad, but any time I do work now, I really am giving it all my attention and energy, and as the months will go by, I think I will be more in the present moment. I'm looking forward to find out how my understanding of productivity deepens then :)

[1]: Personally, I also noticed, that it extended towards other feelings of aversion, such as disgust, hunger, tiredness, annoyance, fear, impatience, stress. To be precise actually, only hunger and tiredness I actually feel (without suffering), the other ones I'm not feeling at all at the moment, though I do notice inefficiencies (-> annoyance, impatience) or dangerous situations (-> fear). Disgust I can't think of any reason right now why I used to feel disgust before (at least in the animal kingdom, everything has evolved to serve it's own survival). But this is a different topic I want to tackle and think about individually :)

[2]: On a side note, the German term for being equanimous is "gleichmütig" and for not caring it's "gleichgültig". There's a thin but deep line between the two of them (and in German not only in concept but also in writing).
